=== PAGE 1 ===
I   Lung Cancer Detection and Multi -Class Classification  
Using CT Images with Explainable AI Diagnosis  
 
21CSP302L - PROJECT   
 
Submitted  by 
 
B S VIKASHSRIKANTH  [RA23110260105 83] 
 S RAVI PRAKASH  [RA23110260105 91] 
 
Under  the Guidance  of 
 
Dr. N Gopinath   
 
Assisstant  Professor , Department of Computational Intelligence  
 
in partial  fulfillment  of the requirements  for the degree  of 
 
BACHELOR  OF TECHNOLOGY  
in 
COMPUTER SCIENCE ENGINEERING  
with specialization in AIML  
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND  TECHNOLOGY  
SRM  INSTITUTE  OF SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY  
KATTANKULATHUR - 603 203 
 
                                                                  MAY   2026


=== PAGE 2 ===
  
Department  of Computational Intelligence  
SRM Institute of Science & Technology  
Own  Work  Declaration Form  
 
 
 
Degree/  Course  : B.TECH/ CSE with specialization in  AIML  
 
Student  Name  : B S VIKASHSRIKANTH , S RAVI PRAKASH  
 
Registration  Number  : RA23110260105 83 , RA23110260105 91 
 
               Title Work                             :  Lung Cancer Detection and Multi -Class Classification  
                                                                              Using CT Images with Explainable AI Diagnosis  
 
 
I / We hereby certify that this assessment compiles with the University’s Rules and Regulations  
relating  to Academic  misconduct  and plagiarism,  as listed  in the University  Website,  Regulations,  
and the Education Committee  guidelines.  
 
I / We confirm that all the work contained in this assessment is my / our own except where  indicated,  
and that  I / We  have  met the following  conditions:  
 
 Clearly  referenced  / listed  all sources  as appro priate  
 Referenced and  put in inverted  commas  all quoted  text (from  books,  web,  etc) 
 Given  the sources  of all  pictures,  data etc.  that are  not my own 
 Not made  any use of the report(s) or essay(s) of  any other  student(s)  either  past or present  
 Acknowledged  in appropriate  places  any help that I have  received  from  others  (e.g. 
fellow  students, technicians, statisticians, external  sources)  
 Compiled  with any other  plagiarism  criteria  specified  in the Course  handbook  / University  
website  
I understand  that any false  claim  for this work  will be penalized  in accordance  with the 
University  policies  and regulations.  
 
DECLARATION:  
We are aware of and understand the University’s policy on Academic misconduct and plagiarism and I  
certify that this assessment is my / o ur own work, except where indicated by referring, and that I have  
followed  the good academic practices noted above.  
 
 
B S VIKASHSRIKANTH                                                             S RAVI PRAKASH  
RA2311026010 583                                                                                            RA231102601059 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii 
 
 


=== PAGE 3 ===
  
 
 
 
SRM  INSTITUTE OF  SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY  
KATTANKULATHUR  – 603 203  
 
BONAFIDE  CERTIFICATE  
 
 
 
 
Certified that 21CSP302L  - Project report titled “ Lung  Cancer Detection 
and Multi -Class Classification Using CT Images with Explainable AI 
Diagnosis ” is the bonafide work of  “B S VIKASHSRIKANTH  [RA23110260105 83], S 
RAVI PRAKASH  [RA23110260105 91]” who carried out the project work  under my 
supervision. Certified further, that to the best of my knowledge the work 
reported herein does not form any other project report or dissertation on the basis 
of which a degree or award was conferred on an earlier occasion on this or any 
other can didate.  
 
 
 
 
                        
                                                    
SIGNATURE  
Dr. N Gopinath  
SUPERVISOR  
Assistant   Professor  
DEPARTMENT OF  
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE   SIGNATURE  
DR. R. ANNIE UTHRA  
PROFESSOR &  
HEAD  
DEPARTMENT OF  
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
               EXAMINER 1                                                                                            EXAMINER 2  
              Name & Signature                 Name & Signature  
 
 
 
 
 
iii 

=== PAGE 4 ===
  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
               
We express our humble gratitude to Dr. C. Muthamizhchelvan , Vice -Chancellor, SRM Institute of 
Science      and Technology, for the facilities extended for the project work and his continued support.  
 
 We extend our sincere thanks to Dr. Leenus Jesu Martin M, Dean -CET, SRM Institute of Science 
and Technology, for his invaluable support.  
 
 We wish to thank Dr. Revathi Venkataraman , Professor and Chairperson, School of Computing, 
SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for her support throughout the project work.  
 
 We encompass our sincere thanks to,School of Computing and Dr.C. Lakshmi,  Professor and 
Associate Chairperson -AI, School of Computing, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for their 
invaluable support.  
 
 We are incredib ly grateful to our Head of the Department, Dr. R. Annie Uthra , Professor, 
Department of Computational Intelligence , SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for her 
suggestions and encouragement at all the stages of the project work.  
 
We want to convey ou r thanks to our Project Coordinators, Panel Head, and Panel Members 
Department of Computational Intelligence, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for their inputs 
during the project reviews and support.  
  
 We register our immeasurable thanks to our Fa culty Advisor, Dr. N. Kanimozhi , Department of 
Computational Intelligence , SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for leading and helping us to 
complete our course.  
  
Our inexpressible respect and thanks to our guide, Dr. N Gopinath , Department of  Computational 
Intelligence ,  SRM Institute of Science and Technology, for providing us with an opportunity to 
pursue our project under his / her mentorship. He / She provided us with the freedom and support to 
explore the research topics of our interest. H is / Her passion for solving problems and making a 
difference in the world has always been inspiring.  
 
We sincerely thank all the staff members of  Computational Intelligence , School of Computing, 
S.R.M Institute of Science and Technology, for their help during our project. Finally, we would like 
to thank our parents, family members, and friends for their unconditional love, constant support and 
encouragement  
 
        
             
 
 
             Authors  
iv 

=== PAGE 5 ===
  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
In the global picture, lung cancer remains the leading cause of mortality from cancers. While artificial 
intelligence algorithms have shown immense promise when it comes to automatic image analyses in 
medical imaging, the gap between their output and clini cians' confidence remains huge.Modern 
solutions based on AI are often treated as black boxes since they give the classification results without 
explanations related to categorization and geography of the occurrence. Also, not all models can give 
the histol ogical subtype that is needed for proper treatment plans.This project proposes a multi -stage, 
explainable AI approach to diagnosing subtypes of lung cancer and malignant tumors detected in 
chest CT images. The proposed architecture is based on the ResNet50  model.Having achieved 95% 
classification accuracy, Sector 1 classifies the nodules into four histological classes: adenocarcinoma, 
squamous cell carcinoma, large cell carcinoma, and normal. On the other hand, Sector 2 uses a binary 
malignancy classifier f or benign/malignant classification of each slice of nodules.An XAI engine with 
two layers has been used in order to solve the problem of explainability. Although LIME can perform 
complementary perturbation analysis on the superpixel level, Grad -CAM can cre ate visualizations of 
activation regions of model predictions using localized heatmaps. A Dual -CAM layer has been added 
to compare the activation of predicted class against that of the most active counter -class.A remarkable 
aspect of the model is its Clini cal Narrative Engine, which automatically converts the activations into 
clinical reports based on location.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
                                                                                  v 

=== PAGE 6 ===
           
          TABLE  OF CONTENTS  
ABSTRACT                      v 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                vi 
 
LIST  OF FIGURES                     viii 
 
LIST OF TABLES                     ix 
 
ABBREVIATIONS                                                                                      x 
 
CHAPTER              TITLE              PAGE  
NO.                      NO. 
 
1 INTRODUCTION           
1.1 Introduction to Project         1 
1.2 Problem Statement  and Description                   1 
1.3  Motivation           3 
1.4 Sustainable Development Goal of the Project      4 
2 LITERATURE  SURVEY          
 2.1 Overview of the Research Area         6 
 2.2 Existing Models and Frameworks        6 
 2.3 Limitations Identified from Literature Survey (Research Gaps)    7 
      2.4 Research Objectives          8 
 2.5 Product Backlog (Key user stories with Desired outcomes)        9 
      2.5 Plan of Acti on (Project Road Map)                                                                              9 
  
3   SPRINT PLANNING AND EXECTION METHODOLOGY     
 3.1 SPRINT I  [Image Preprocessing & Hierarchical Classification]  
  3.1.1 Objectives with user stories of  Sprint I       11 
  3.1.2 Functional Document         12 
  3.1.3 Architecture Document         13 
  3.1.4 Outcome of objectives/ Result Analysis       24 
  3.1.5 Sprint Retrospective         15   
 
 
vi 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 7 ===
  
 
 
3.2 SPRINT II   [XAI Integration & Clinical Narrative  Engine]                              
  3.2.1 Objectives with user stories of Sprint II      16 
  3.2.2 Functional Document         17 
  3.2.3 Architecture Document         18 
  3.2.4 Outcome of objectives/ Result Analysis       18 
  3.2.5 Sprint Retrospective         19 
 
4    RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS         
 4.1 Project Outcomes (Performance Evaluation )                                                             20  
                  4.2 Image Preprocessing Evaluation  22 
 4.3 Validation of Grad -CAM Explainability  23 
 4.4   LIME Analysis evaluation  24 
 4.5 AI narrative engine  26 
5    CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENT      27 
REFERENCES           30 
APPENDIX            31 
 A  CODING            31 
 B JOURNAL DETAILS                     36 
 C  PLAGIARISM REPORT         37 
D   AI REPORT                                                                                                                    38 
E PUBLICATION DETAILS                                                     39  
               
 
 
 
 
vii 
 

=== PAGE 8 ===
  
   LIST  OF FIGURES   
CHAPTER     TITLE              PAGE  
NO.                      NO. 
 
1.1 System Architecture — Hierarchical Lung Diagnostic Pipeline . . . . . . . . . .                        3  
1.2 In Deep Pipeline of System Architecture . . . . . . . . . .                                                      5 
2.1 A normal CT scanned Image   . . . . . . . . . .                                                                             7 
2.2 Image Preprocessing Pipeline (Median Blur → CLAHE → Morphology) . . . . . . .              8                                            
3.1 Training and Validation Accuracy for Sector 1 Subtype Classification . . . .           14  
3.2 Accuracy metrics for Sector 2 Malignancy Detection using the LIDC -IDRI . . . . .. 19 
4.1 System Implementation Screenshot showing Subtype Identificatio n. . . . .               30 
4.2 from a normal ct image to gead cam observed ct image . . . . . . . . . .                           25 
4.3 Web Dashboard — Sector 2 (Malignancy Detection) . . . . . . . . . .                                      26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii 

=== PAGE 9 ===
  
 
LIST  OF TABLES  
 
 
CHAPTER     TITLE               PAGE  
                      NO.                      NO.  
  
3.1 Sprint I Functional Test Cases . . . . . . . . . .                                                                12 
3.2 Sprint I Classification Metrics . . . . . . . . . .                                                                14 
3.3 Sprint I Retr ospective . . . . . . . . . .                                                                             15 
3.4         Overall recal and f1 score . . . . .                                                                                15 
3.5 Sprint II Fu nctional Test Cases . . . . . . . . . .                                                              17 
3.6 Sprint II Retrospective . . . . . . . . . .                                                                           19 
4.1 Per-Class Performance — Sector 1 (4 -Class Classifier) . . . .                       20 
4.2 Heatmap Analysis — Sample Results  . . . . . . . . . .                                          24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ix 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 10 ===
  
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
CT  Computed Tomography  
CNN   Convolutional  Neural Network  
ResNet   Residual Network  
XAI  Explainable Artificial Intelligence  
Grad -CAM  Gradient -weighted Class Activation Mapping  
LIME   Local Interpretable Model -agnostic Explanations  
CLAHE  Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization  
LIDC -IDRI  Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative  
NSCLC  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  
VATS   Video -Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery  
PET   Positron Emission Tomography  
SVC   Superior Vena Cava  
EGFR   Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor  
ALK   Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase  
PD-L1  Programmed Death -Ligand 1  
SMOTE  Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique  
API  Application Programming Interface  
GPU   Graphics Processing Unit  
CUDA   Compute Unified Device Architecture  
  

=== PAGE 11 ===
  
 
CHAPTER  1 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
1.1 Introduction to Project  
Cancer of the lungs is the most frequent cause of death from cancer in the world, and should the 
disease not be detected in its early stages, it is known to develop rapidly because of its high level of 
heterogeneity. It is important today to identi fy specific subtypes of the disease in order to determine 
what kind of treatment options to apply, since there has been a change in diagnosis from a general 
one to precision medicine. This has always involved an analysis of the images from the CT scan of 
the lungs through careful visual inspection by the radiologist, which has become increasingly difficult 
due to the increase in medical imaging.  
In recent times, CNNs have been used as effective models for automatically performing analyses of 
medical images and even outperforming humans in terms of localized detection capabilities. 
However, there is still the issue of lack of transparency when using AI in such an important field like 
healthcare. It would be difficult to use an automated diagnosis tool when on e cannot explain where it 
got the results from, especially because they might be concerned about the source of the findings. 
Additionally, current AI models tend to be binary in their predictions, which limits their scope.  
In view of overcoming these limit ations, this paper recommends an integrated two -tier approach for 
the AI diagnostic solution proposed here. Firstly, we implement ResNet50 in the formation of a 
hierarchical classifier to classify sub -type categorization and malignancy assessment. Secondly , a 
dual modal explainable mechanism comprising both LIME and Grad -CAM is put forth as the second 
tier. The dual modal model has been enhanced by automating the clinical narrative generator for zone -
wise diagnosis.  
 
1.2 Problem Statement and Description  
There are three main problems associated with modern AI lung cancer diagnosis technologies: first, 
these systems operate like "black boxes," not providing textual or graphical explanations for their 
diagnoses; second, they can only provide a binary decision abou t whether there is cancer or no cancer, 
lacking an ability to conduct histological subtyping; and third, they cannot generate any meaningful 
reports with reference to anatomical regions.  
 
 
1 

=== PAGE 12 ===
  
 
This technique can overcome the shortcomings stated above throu gh the introduction of a multiple -
stage classification system that utilizes the concept of bi -modal explainability. In the first sector, the 
utilization of ResNet50 to achieve an accuracy level of 95% across four categories of histology 
subtypes (Adenocarc inoma, Squamous Cell, Large Cell, Normal) is used. The second sector utilizes 
the binary classifier for detecting whether the image is benign or malignant.  
With regard to anatomical zones, these systems are not capable of providing any meaningful output. 
In conventional radiological assessment, the diagnosis is made by analyzing the findings in terms of 
the following anatomical zones: upper lobe, middle lobe, lower lobe, hilar zone, mediastinal area, and 
pleura. The referring physician is able to schedule surgery, follow up on the progress of the disease, 
and correlate imaging findings with patient symptoms because of this information based on 
anatomical zones. It becomes difficult for the physician to integrate the AI -based analysis into his 
reporting proc ess due to the mismatch of these two approaches.  
In this regard, this paper proposes a multi -level classification algorithm that exploits the concept of 
bi-modal explainability in order to address the above -stated limitations. The first layer of the model 
is based on ResNet50 architecture, which is trained using ImageNet weights, and the images obtained 
from the database of histopathology images are used to train the network. It should be noted that there 
are four types of histological subtypes, namely Aden ocarcinoma, Squamous Cell Carcinoma, Large 
Cell Carcinoma, and Normal. In addition, it is possible to achieve a 95% accuracy rate by using the 
training images. The binary classifier is implemented in the second phase to differentiate between 
benign and mal ignant conditions.  
Whereas the treatment for squamous cell carcinoma will include immunotherapy by using drugs such 
as pembrolizumab, the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma will require tests for EGFR mutations in addition 
to the use of drugs like erlotinib and g efitinib in its treatment. In case of such a misdiagnosis or lack 
of classification of the cancer, there will be chances of incorrect medication, poor efficiency of the 
drug, and adverse effects for the patient. For this reason, it can be argued that “the “cancer versus 
non-cancer” approach is not sufficient.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

=== PAGE 13 ===
  
 
 
Fig.1.1 System Architecture — Hierarchical Lung Diagnostic Pipeline  
 
1.3 Motivation  
The widespread incidence of lung cancer throughout the world and the urgent requirement for an AI 
solution that physicians would trust are the two major reasons motivating this project. About 2.2 
million cases of lung cancer are discovered worldwide annual ly; however, if the cancer is not detected 
early and classified correctly, then the probability of surviving the condition within five years is 
dramatically reduced. Three factors primarily motivate this research project. Firstly, treatment 
efficacy is grea tly affected by the early and accurate classification of the histology of lung cancer, 
whereby treatment is required to be customized based on the type of cancer.  
Secondly, it is extremely tiring to review hundreds of CT slices daily. The use of both LIME and 
Grad -CAM within this project addresses this need perfectly as it provides the clinicians with analyses 
and visualizations that they can review and depend upon.Fourthly, there is a significant incentive for 
adopting this technology as it promises to mak e expert diagnostic expertise accessible to anyone.  
 
 
 
3 


=== PAGE 14 ===
  
 
Access to professional thoracic radiologists is severely limited in many poor countries. An online 
platform for an explainable AI diagnostic system would enable remote and disadvantaged hospitals 
to have access to specialist -level diagnostic expertise and save those who may not live to tell the tale 
because of misdiagnosis.  
 
1.4 Sustainable Development Goal of the Project  
The third goal set out by the United Nations for sustainable development, "Good Health and Well -
being," is directly affected by this project. Through this technology, it aims to reduce mortality and 
save lives using a tool based on artificial intelligence that helps diagnose and subtype lung cancer 
earlier and with more precision. The  ability to be explained and trusted makes this technology more 
accessible for use in constrained clinical environments.  
The effect of this research has direct bearing on Goal 3, also called "Good Health and Well -being," 
out of the United Nations' Sustaina ble Development Goals. The targets of Goal 3 include reducing 
premature mortality rates from NCDs by one -third by means of prevention and treatment until 2030 
(Target 3.4). This goal aims to offer individuals good health habits and well -being at all stages  in 
their lives. Target 3.4 includes emphasis on one of the most widespread forms of NCDs, namely, lung 
cancer. Due to the use of artificial intelligence techniques to detect and classify lung cancer early, 
this task will achieve its objective successfully . 
Moreover, such an approach also meets the goals outlined under SDG Target 3.8, which aims at 
achieving universal health coverage, including ensuring access to essential medicines and vaccines 
that are safe, effective, and affordable. This project ensures  that high -end diagnostic services using 
the latest AI technology can be offered even in poorly equipped clinical settings without access to 
expensive diagnostic applications and hardware infrastructures by making the diagnostic solution 
accessible via web -based applications through web browsers.   
Furthermore, the proposed project is consistent with SDG Target 3.b, which focuses on the research 
and development of vaccines and medicines for both communicable and non -communicable diseases 
prevalent among deve loping countries.  The implementation of this technology will be simpler for 
restricted clinical application because of its reliability and explainability . 
 
 
 
4 
 

=== PAGE 15 ===
  
 
 
 
Fig.1.2 In Deep Pipeline of System Architecture  
 
 The double modality approach of explainability brings together the high level of capability of AI and 
practical use by making sure that even physicians with no familiarity in AI technology can understand, 
evaluate and take appropriate action based on the AI diagnostic suggestions. In this paper, a two -tier 
approach for the proposed AI diagnostic solution has been recommended in order to deal with the 
limitations. Firstly, ResNet50 model is used to develop a hierarchical classifier in order to classify 
subtype and malignancy. Due to the usage of skip connections to resolve vanishing gradient problems, 
50-layer deep learning framework becomes possible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
5 
 


=== PAGE 16 ===
  
 
CHAPTER  2 
LITERATURE SURVEY  
 
2.1  Overview of the Research Area  
During the last decade, image classification in medicine using deep learning has seen rapid progress. 
CNNs were initially applied for finding lung nodules where the problem is considered to be binary, 
whether the nodule is cancerous or not. The results obt ained by models like VGG -16 and AlexNet 
have proven that detection can be automated while achieving performance comparable to that of 
novice radiologists.  
With growing expertise in this field, the two key directions were established. Firstly, transfer lear ning 
using the ImageNet pretrained architectures like ResNet, DenseNet, and EfficientNet resulted in 
superior results on small -scale medical datasets thanks to the ability of these networks to learn feature 
representation based on a large dataset of millio ns of natural images. Secondly, a shift to more 
clinically useful task was made: differentiating between histological subtypes such as 
Adenocarcinoma, Squamous Cell Carcinoma, and Large Cell Carcinoma rather than a simple binary 
detection task. In parallel to developing classification methods, Explainable AI techniques such as 
Grad -CAM, SHAP, and LIME were created in order to generate explanations behind each decision 
made by the network. Nevertheless, the majority of approaches utilize just one particular X AI 
technique and fail to create clinical context out of its output.  
 
2.2  Existing Models and Frameworks  
The following architectures are well -known in the sphere of lung cancer diagnosis:  
Classification of lung nodules using LIDC -IDRI data set via VGG -16 and ResNet is widely applied 
and demonstrated 85 -92% accuracy in binary problems. But these models offer almost no 
explainability but through confidence level calculation and do not perform subtypes separation.The 
DenseNet201 architecture, due to the dense con nections of neurons, which were claimed to keep 
detailed characteristics, was chosen after numerous studies proved higher results for multi -class 
problem solutions in CT images of lungs.  
 
6 

=== PAGE 17 ===
  
 Yet the problem of training instability and overfitting with med ical images of a relatively low 
quantity remained. To combine high performance with efficient computing, the EfficientNet 
architecture was suggested. But the method of compound scaling that made the architecture of the 
EfficientNet possible is not ideal for  medical CT images due to the latter's nature. Since it is common 
that fine -tuned models are better than those trained from scratch, transfer learning using ImageNet 
pre-trained networks is considered standard practice today. The novel technique involves us ing the 
existing layers as feature extraction layers, but by replacing the last layer of the network with a new 
classifier, the model can customize itself for this specific task.  
 
     Fig.2.1 A normal CT scanned Image  
 
2.3  Limitations Identified from Litera ture Survey (Research Gaps)  
First, almost all of the current applications are single task -oriented. In the hierarchical pipeline that 
mimics the actual clinical decision -making process, they perform either binary classification or multi -
classification subt yping but not both.Second, explainability is usually an add -on. Most current 
applications only deploy one explainable AI technology, which is Grad -CAM; moreover, the heatmap 
generated is bare of any clinical explanation. In other words, there is not yet an y application that 
combines LIME, which is the perturbation -based technology, and Grad -CAM, which is the gradient -
based method.Lastly, narrative generation has yet to be automated. The expert's interpretation is still 
needed to explain the most advanced XA I visualization technologies.  
 
7 
 


=== PAGE 18 ===
  
The heatmap activations have yet to be transformed into clinical notes that contain location -based 
symptoms, proposed procedures, and treatment options.  Finally, there is poor treatment of class 
imbalance within medical data sets. Biases towards majority classes within models arise due to the 
inability of current augmentation techniques to account for feature variance within rare subtypes, such 
as Large Ce ll Carcinoma.Secondly, there is inadequate consideration of deployment. Without a 
complete process for deploying AI on web -based platforms that includes explainability and inference, 
most research will remain Jupyter notebooks.   
 
Fig.2.2 Image Preprocessing Pipeline (Median Blur → CLAHE → Morphology)  
 
2.4  Research Objectives  
• Develop a hierarchy -based classification model using ResNet50 architecture with ≥95% accuracy 
in four classes histological subtyping.  
• Use a two -layer approach for model int erpretability in the form of Grad -CAM and LIME.  
• Develop a smart clinical narrative generation engine producing location -specific diagnostics for 
eight anatomical locations.  
• Deploy the complete system as a web -based application that can be used in produ ction and offers 
real-time inference.  
8 
 


=== PAGE 19 ===
  
2.5  Product Backlog (Key user stories with Desired outcomes)  
As such, with explainability embedded throughout, the product backlog consisted of a hierarchical 
diagnostic approach, which would take a general histological subtyping to malignancy 
classification.Four key modules make up the architecture of this project:  (1) Image Preprocessing and 
Enhancement; (2) Multiclass Classification of Subtypes via ResNet50; (3) Binary Classification for the 
Detection of Malignancies via another ResNet50; and (4) Two -level Explainable AI Synthesis through 
Grad -CAM and LIME.  
Each o f these modules were designed and built over two iterations of sprints.The use of two different 
ResNet50 classifiers rather than one multi -task classifier is an essential architectural decision. This 
helps circumvent the inevitable trade -off between multip le tasks in multi -task learning approaches with 
a shared backbone architecture.Consequently, with the implementation of explainability throughout, 
the product backlog was comprised of a diagnostic approach in a hierarchical manner, beginning with 
a histolo gical subtyping towards malignancy classification.  One of the design considerations taken into 
account is using two distinct ResNet50 models instead of a unified multi -task model. This ensures that 
both models can fine -tune their feature extraction accordi ng to their respective tasks and therefore 
avoid the inevitable loss of efficiency seen in multi -tasking models.  
2.6  Plan of Action (Project Road Map)  
Sprint I: Hierarchical Classification Engine and Image Preprocessing  
• Implement image preprocessing pipeline for CT scans (Median Blur, CLAHE, Morphology).  
• Train the ResNet50 4 -class subtype classifier model using Kaggle Chest CT data set (target: 95%).  
• Train the ResNet50 binary classifier using LIDC -IDRI dataset.  
• Design a Flask backend with APIs f or prediction tasks.  
• Develop a web dashboard with a dark UI theme having zones for uploading images and result 
presentation.  
Preprocessing Pipeline for CT Scan Images  
The images obtained from CT scans are preprocessed before being used as input for train ing and 
testing of classifiers. The process has three main steps:  
 
 
9 
 

=== PAGE 20 ===
  
The image is blurred using median blurring without destroying the edges of the image. The filter used 
for median blurring is either 3x3 or 5x5 kernels depending on the resolution of the image since 
anatomical information should not be destroyed when identifying nodules.  
The contrast of the lung regions having low densities is enhanced and over enhancement avoided at 
high-density regions through CLAHE which applies operations on the lo cal image tiles rather than 
performing global operations. The adjustable parameters in CLAHE include clipping limit (clip=2.0) 
and grid size (grid=8×8).  
Sprint II: Clinical Narrative Engine and XAI Integration  
• Perform comparison using Dual -CAM to apply G rad-CAM (comparison between predicted vs. 
counter class).  
• Apply the LIME superpixel model -based explanation on both models.  
• Develop a Heatmap engine having eight zones for analysis (distribution, size, morphology, and 
position).  
• Develop a clinical na rrative engine with nine different reports having nine different narratives.  
• Incorporate the Medical Chatbot and Artificial Intelligence reasoner for generating AI narrative.  
• Develop a summary report page that can be saved and printed.   
Dual -CAM: Compa rative Analysis between Grad -CAM (Predicted vs. Counter Class)  
While conventional Grad -CAM only shows activation for the predicted class, Dual -CAM extends this 
approach through the generation of two maps:  
• Primary CAM: The map showing activation for the predicted class to illustrate what the network 
used while deciding on the decision.  
• Counter CAM: The activation map showing what could have been the alternative option (highest 
probability among others).  
It is easier for medical practitioners to identify  decision boundaries with such a comparative analysis. 
This is achieved by running the backward pass twice and overlaying the results on the original image 
with a diverging color map.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 

=== PAGE 21 ===
  
CHAPTER  3 
SPRINT PLANNING AND EXECTION METHODOLOGY  
3.1 SPRINT I : Core Infrastructure & Threat Detection Engine  
3.1.1  Objectives with User Stories of Sprint I  
Task objective : Develop an end -to-end pipeline to perform binary classification of malignancy, 
preprocess raw images, classify into four subtypes using histology (accuracy >= 95%), and present 
results through a Flask online interface.  
User stories:  
• Story 1:  Image Preprocessing Pipeline: To ensure consistency in the features obtained from 
different CT scanning devices, offer a preprocessing pipeline including median blur (k=3), global 
histogram equalization, contrast -limited adaptive histogram equalization (c lipLimit=2.0, 
tileGridSize=8×8), and morphological operations.  
• Story 2:  4-Class Subtype Classifier: To classify adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, large 
cell carcinoma, and normal tissues, design a ResNet50 neural network classifier customized for 4 
output classes by FC layers (2048→512→4, dropout rate=0.5) using the Kaggle Chest CT data set. 
Target: Accuracy = 95% to handle class imbalance.  
• Story 3:  Binary Malignancy Detector: Build the second model using ResNet50 architecture to 
perform the Beni gn/Malignant classification task with the help of the LIDC -IDRI dataset. In this 
architecture, an additional head FC 2048 ->512 ->128 ->2 and Dropout 0.4/0.3 will be added. Pre -
trained weights for this model will be extracted from ImageNet V2.  
• Story 4 : Flas k Backend & API Architecture: Build a simple Flask backend and API with binary 
analysis endpoint /analyze/binary, four -class analysis endpoint /analyze/fourclass, and a main 
endpoint /. It will also incorporate GPU auto -detection mechanism using CUDA/CPU a lternative 
mechanism.  
• Story 5:  Web Dashboard Architecture: Build an advanced -level web dashboard with a dark theme 
design, supporting drag -and-drop images upload feature, having two sectors on the sidebar named as 
Sector 1 and Sector 2, real -time analysi s with loading animations and results displaying, including 
probability bars and image gallery.  
 
 
 
11 
 

=== PAGE 22 ===
 3.1.2 Functional Document (Functional Test Cases)  
For Sprint I, I observed the execution of the first step of image classification process. The current 
architecture can accept CT Scan images through the web interface; preprocess these images using six 
steps; pass it to two ResNet50 models; and then perform additional processing of the output. Sector 
1 classifies the image using the confidence score into a ny one of the four histological subtypes. On 
the other hand, Sector 2 processes the image using nodule slices to detect the presence of malignancy.  
The web application displays original image, enhanced image, classification output, and probability 
distribu tion in tabular form; enables drag -and-drop image uploading; and ensures that inference time 
does not exceed one second as model weight is loaded at start -up. 
All functionalities have been tested using the test cases below.  
 
 
Feature  Test Case  Steps to 
Execute  Expected 
Output  Actual Output  Status  
4-Class 
Classification  To Classify and 
vary the sizes of 
cancer cells  Upload cancer 
cells chest CT 
image to 
Sector 1.  Model predicts 
cancer cells 
with 90% 
accuracy.  Predicted 
Adenocarcinoma 
at 94.2% 
confidence.  Pass 
Binary 
Detection  Detect malignant 
or benign nodules  Upload LIDC -
IDRI focused 
nodule s to 
Sector 2.  Model predicts 
Malignant 
with 8 0% 
accuracy.  Predicted 
Malignant at 
91.7% 
confidence.  Pass 
Image 
Preprocessing  CLAHE /histogram 
equalization  
enhancement  
quality  Submit low -
contrast CT 
scan and get 
enhanced 
output.  Enhanced 
image shows 
improved 
image contrast.  CLAHE + 
Morphology 
produced clear 
tissue 
boundaries.  Pass 
GPU 
Detection  CUDA device 
auto-selection  Start server on 
local host.  System detects 
and uses 
CUDA for 
inference.  Device: cuda — 
GPU inference 
active.  Pass 
Web Upload  Drag -and-drop  
CT image  Drag PNG file 
onto upload in 
browser  to 
check and get 
output  Preview strip 
shows file 
name, size, 
and thumbnail.  File accepted; 
preview 
displayed 
correctly.  Pass 
AI Diagnosis  Classify normal 
tissue scan  Narrative AI 
automatically 
explains 
about the 
output  A paragraph 
about the 
cancer cell will 
be displayed  Predicted 
Normal at 
97.1% 
confidence.  Pass 
 
Table 3.1: Sprint I Functional Test Cases  
 
 
 
 
 
12 

=== PAGE 23 ===
  
 
3.1.3  Architecture Document  
Sprint I is designed based on a modular, hierarchical architecture and uses a Python Flask back -end. 
This architecture comprises the following components:  
Back -End (Flask):  
This framework manages the HTTP requests and response generation via its internal routing. Flask 
uses Jinja2 templates for the dashboard and generates the API for analyzing images, namely 
/analyze/fourclass and /analyze/binary endpoints. The maximum file s ize limit for the server's 
multipart form data is set to 16 MB.  
Deep Learning Layer:  
At the launch of the application, two ResNet50 networks are initialized within the memory. The four -
class subtype model uses the head network (2048→512→4), which was learn ed from scratch with 
Kaggle Chest CT data. The binary classification model applies the head network 
(2048→512→128→2) based on the ImageNet V2 pretrained weights with LIDC -IDRI data. These 
models were developed within the PyTorch and Torchvision libraries.  
Image Pre -processing Layer:  
Every image pre -processing process is carried out using OpenCV. Raw images are first converted 
from bytes to grayscale, resized to 224x224 pixels, applied median blur, global histogram 
equalization, CLAHE, and finally morphologi cal opening and closing operations. Applying 
ImageNet mean and standard deviation statistics, the enhanced grayscale image is replicated to form 
an RGB stack and normalized.  
Front -end Layer:  
This one -page web application was built using HTML5, CSS3, and Ja vaScript. Fonts such as Space 
Grotesk and JetBrains Mono are used for the dark theme interface design. The website layout consists 
of a content div element with CSS transitions and an always -present sidebar with a width of 240 
pixels for browsing through s ectors.  
 
 
 
13 
 

=== PAGE 24 ===
  
 
3.1.4  Outcome of Objectives / Result Analysis  
After applying the SMOTE algorithm training procedure in the feature space to tackle the problem of 
imbalanced classes in Large Cell Carcinoma classification, the 4 -class subtype classification model 
showed the best accuracy of 95% in Kaggle Chest CT test dataset validation. In turn, the binary 
malignancy classification model demonstrated its optimal performance when relying on the 
pretrained ImageNet V2 architecture, which feature d good capability in extracting fine details from 
nodules.  
 
 
Model  Task  Accuracy  Architecture  Inference Time  
ResNet50 (Sector 
1) 4-Class Subtype 
Classification  95.0%  ResNet50 + 
FC(512→4)  <1.0s per CT slice  
ResNet50 (Sector 
2) Binary 
Malignancy 
Detection  ~92%  ResNet50 + 
FC(512→128→2)  <0.8s per CT slice  
 
Table 3.2: Sprint I Classification Performance  
 
 
 
Fig.3.1 Training and Validation Accuracy for Sector 1 Subtype Classification  
(95% peak accuracy).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 


=== PAGE 25 ===
  
 
3.1.5  Sprint Retrospective  
 
 
What Went Well  What Went Poorly  Ideas / Improvements  Actions Taken  
ResNet50 proved 
superior compared to 
DenseNet201 and 
EfficientNet models that 
were tried out earlier, 
reaching 95% accuracy.  
 Incompatibility in the 
design of the 
architecture led to 
inconsistent 
performance on 
grayscale CT images.  
 Use ResNet50 to 
leverage the deep 
residual connection 
capabilities in both 
cases.  
 ResNet50 was selected 
over EfficientNetB0 for 
inference in both 
sectors.  
SMOTE oversampling 
was applied.  
 
Model certainty and 
clarity o f tissue 
contours significantly 
improved due to 
CLAHE preprocessing.  The model favored 
adenocarcinoma 
because of the major 
class imbalance 
between large cell 
carcinoma and 
adenocarcinoma.  
 Oversampling of the 
minority class can be 
done using SMOTE on 
augme nted features.  
 The efficiency and low 
eye strain thanks to the 
dark theme were 
highlighted positively 
by users of the 
interface.  
 
Dark -themed UI always 
been using in medical 
field for less eye strain.  Freezing of the 
interface while running 
inference happened 
because of synchronous 
processing of uploaded 
images.  
 Make the process of 
image uploading 
asynchronous with 
loading spinners on the 
interface.  
 Added  JavaScript fetch 
with CSS spinner 
animations for both 
sectors to handle the 
uniqueness od UI.  
 
Table 3 .3: Sprint I Retrospective  
 
 
 
                          
 
Table 3. 4: overall recall and f1 score  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 


=== PAGE 26 ===
  
 
 
3.2 SPRINT II: AI Intelligence & Real -Time Dashboard  
3.2.1  Objectives with User Stories of Sprint II : 
The goal is to include comprehensive explanations provided by an explainable AI system, including 
dual-CAM comparison, LIME analysis on superpixels, heatmaps using Grad -CAM, automatic 
generation of a clinical narrative with 96 location -specific reports, an d a context -aware medical 
chatbot.  
 
User Stories:  
• User Story 1:  Grad -CAM Heatmaps Generator: Generate activations and compute gradients by 
attaching a hook in the fourth layer of ResNet50 to produce a Grad -CAM map. Create 224x224 
heatmaps normalized to v isualize the most worrisome zones using JET coloring (alpha=0.4).  
• User Story 2:  Dual -CAM Comparison: Visualize the reasons why a specific diagnosis (diagnosis 
A) was preferred over another one (diagnosis B) in generating the heatmaps. • Story 8: Real -Time  
Streaming & UI Dashboard - Create a React SPA with Server -Sent Events streaming to give the 
analyst live attack alerts and visual severity indicators within 200ms of detection.  
• User Story 3: Heatmap Engine based on 8 Zones: Analyze  the anatomical location (8 -zone matrix), 
the size (Small/Medium/Large), the shape based on circularity (Rounded/Oval/Irregular), the 
intensity (High/Moderate/Low), and the dispersion (Localized/Bilateral/Diffuse) by performing 
connected component analysis  through Grad -CAM activation map.  
• User Story 4 : Clinical Narrative Engine: Develop an extensive system for documenting clinical 
cases with 96 different reports (malignant × 8 zones + cancer subtype × 8 zones × 4 categories). For 
each report there is eigh t symptoms, five diagnostic follow -ups, five treatment choices, and location -
specific analysis.  
• User Story 5:  LIME Superpixels Explainer: Employ the lime_image framework for segmentation 
using Quickshift with 100 samples to determine the superpixel contr ibution to perform Local 
Interpretable Model -agnostic Explanations.  
• User Story 6:  AI Chatbot for Medicine: Develop a contextual chatbot capable of answering 
diagnostic questions associated with the images after analysis done on both fields.  
 
 
 
 
16 
 

=== PAGE 27 ===
  
 
3.2.2 Functional Document (Functional Test Cases)  
The whole explainability pipeline was part of Sprint II. Nowadays, the software produces Dual -CAM 
visualizations showing the comparison of the predicted and counter class, Grad -CAM visualizations 
that show attention locations, LIME visualizations indicating superpixels that favor or refute the 
finding, as well as clinical notes generated automatically containing location -based symptoms, 
actions to take next, and treatments.  The whole point of sprint 2 is only of lime and explainable 
features, these unique and new gen fratures are using in day to day applications and many machine 
learning projects.  
 
Feature  Test Case  Steps to 
Execute  Expected 
Output  Actual Output  Status  
Grad -CAM  Used to 
Generate 
heatmap for 
binary 
prediction  Upload cancer 
cell CT; check  
heatmap  with 
boundary 
appears.  Heatmap 
highlights 
suspicious 
found in 
nodule region.  Heatmap correctly 
located to upper 
right lobe.  Pass 
Dual -CAM  Compare 
predicted vs 
actual  class Analyse the 
CT scan; 
check for dual 
heatmap 
display.  Two side -by-
side heatmaps 
with different  
patterns.  Predicted CAM 
showed focal mass  
and others works as 
same Pass 
LIME  Generate 
superpixel 
explanation  Click 'Run 
LIME 
Analysis' after 
classif ication.  Positive and 
narrative 
generated 
within 5 
seconds.  LIME identified 
14.2% positive 
superpixels in upper 
left. Pass 
Clinical Notes  check  zone -
specific 
reports  Upload 
Squamous Cell 
CT with any 
side activation.  Clinical notes 
show Right 
Upper Lobe 
specific data.  Correct zone 
detected; 
symptoms/treatments 
matched.  Pass 
AI Chatbot  Ask about 
analysed scan  Type 'What 
did you find in 
my scan?' in 
chatbot.  Chatbot 
responds with 
prediction and 
confidence 
from context.  Chatbot returned 
correct prediction 
and stage from 
Sector 2.  Pass 
 
Table 3.5: Sprint II Functional Test Cases  
 
 
The clinical narrative engine generates comprehensive, location -specific reports that include stage 
estimation, risk grading, anatomical analysis, symptom lists, diagnostic proced ures, and treatment 
options — all tailored to the specific cancer subtype and its precise 8 -zone location.  
 
 
 
 
17 
 

=== PAGE 28 ===
  
 
3.2.3  Architecture Document  
Three main additions were introduced into the architecture during Sprint II:  
 Explainability Engine (LIME + Grad -CAM):  
The Grad -CAM part hooks both forward and backward layers for ResNet50 at layer 4. Gradients are 
hooked, global average -pooled, and then used as weights for weighted feature activation maps in the 
process of inference. This results in ReLU , normalization, and scaling of the obtained image to 224 
x 224 dimensions. The LIME component generates positive overlay images and full overlay images 
based on 100 perturbation images via the lime_image package with Quickshift segmentation.  
 Clinical Narr ative Engine:  
Notes.py is a Python script with 1,271 lines of code, including binary malignant information for eight 
anatomical regions and structured clinical information for three types of cancer. Each region is 
accompanied by eight symptoms, five possib le diagnoses, five treatments, and a paragraph analyzing 
the location, all of which have been carefully crafted with clinical accuracy. The correct version is 
selected by the engine based on the results of an 8 -region heatmap analysis.  
 AI-powered Chatbot:  
User queries and contextual information from both domains are received at a Flask endpoint (/chat). 
After determining the query’s intent via keyword matching, the chatbot responds with relevant 
contextual information based on the analyzed scan, such as pre dictions, confidence levels, stages, and 
location information.  
 
3.2.4 Analysis of Results/ Achievement of Objectives : 
All goals for Sprint II were successfully met. Under pathological conditions, the use of Grad -CAM results 
in effective localization of the key nodule with good alignment to the expected diagnosis. The use of Dual -
CAM provides a visual demonstration of the decision boundary used by the algorithm. The LIME 
approach makes use of narrative explanations to identify superpixels that support and oppose each other.  
The clinical narrative generator produces full and detailed reports that are tailored specifically fo r a 
particular cancer type and its location in one of 8 zones. Such reports contain information regarding 
staging, risk evaluation, anatomy, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options.In a system with a GPU, 
the whole workflow (image pre -processing, classi fication, Grad -CAM application, and narrative 
generation) takes less than 1.5 seconds per image slice.  
 
 
18 

=== PAGE 29 ===
  
 
 
Fig.3.2 Accuracy metrics for Sector 2 Malignancy Detection using the LIDC - 
IDRI dataset.  
3.2.5  Sprint Retrospective  
 
 
What Went Well  What Went Poorly  Ideas / Improvements  Actions Taken  
High correlation 
existed between the 
predictions made 
using heatmaps and 
the expected location 
of the tumors.  
 LIME Initially, it would 
take over 30 seconds to 
make a prediction using 
LIME due to high 
perturbations.  
 Regarding the 
allowed maximum 
delay time, set batch 
size to ten and 
sample size to one 
hundred.  
 LIME works on 
demand rather than 
automatically and can 
run in under ten 
seconds.  
 
The system 
consisting of 96 
medical conditions is 
highly app reciated 
due to its rich 
knowledg e base.  
 It is due to threshold 
sensitivity that some 
peripheral tumors 
have been 
misdiagnosed as 
being central tumors.  
 For increased boundary 
sensitivity, reduce 
detection rate of central 
zone from 0.9 to 0.8.  
. Tuned cen tral 
detection: is_central = 
zone_scores['central'] > 
max_vert * 0.8.  
It is simple to 
understand Dual -
CAM even for a 
layman since it is 
visually explained.  
 Several medical 
questions could not 
be answered owing to 
the use of keyword -
based algorithm in 
chatbots.  
 Use context -based 
response generation 
and add more 
keywords to your 
vocabulary.  
 Redo chatbot to check  
context before falling 
back to keyword 
matching.  
 
 
Table 3.6: Sprint II Retrospective  
 
 
 
19 


=== PAGE 30 ===
  
CHAPTER  4 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  
4. Project Outcomes (Performance Evaluation, Comparisons, Testing Results)  
This project  includes an extensive discussion on Lung Cancer AI Diagnostic System. All the results 
extracted by analyzing the system have been classified into six separate sections that includ e 
Accuracy Assessment of Classification Model, Efficiency Analysis of Image Preprocessing, 
Explanation Ability through Grad -CAM, LIME Analysis Performance Assessment, Performance 
Assessment of Clinical Narrative Engine, and Online Performance of the Applic ation.  
4.1 Classification Model Performance  
4.1.1 Sector 1 — Four -Class Subtype Classification  
The number of subtypes involved in this process is four. These include Adenocarcinoma, Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma, Large Cell Carcinoma, and Normal subtypes. Classi fication was done based on all 
the above subtypes using the Kaggle Chest CT Dataset and ResNet50 Architecture along with Custom 
FC Head.  
To address the issue of class imbalance that exists in this data set, the training used SMOTE, a 
minority oversampling method performed at the feature level. The least represented category, Large 
Cell Carcinoma, is significantly underrepresented compared to Adenocarcinoma and Normal 
classifications. Without the use of SMOTE, 38 percent of large cells were misclassified as 
Adenocarcinoma in the original model, indicating a significant class bias toward the most prevalent 
category. After SMOTE was applied, the total accuracy increased from 88 percent to 95 percent, 
while large cell carcinoma recall increased from 62 percent t o 89 percent.  
 
Table 4.1: Per -Class Performance — Sector 1 (4 -Class Classifier)  
Class  Precision  Recall  F1-Score  Support  
Adenocarcinoma  0.96 0.95 0.955  315 
Squamous Cell  0.94 0.96 0.950  298 
Large Cell  0.91 0.89 0.900  142 
Normal  0.98 0.99 0.985  370 
Weighted Avg  0.95 0.95 0.950  1125  
 
 
 
20 

=== PAGE 31 ===
   
 
Based on the confusion matrix analysis, the most frequent error is the confusion between 
Adenocarcinoma and Large Cell Carcinoma (4.2%), a result that confirms the available data from 
radiological literature according to which these two types have similar morphologic features on the 
CT scan. Squamous cell carcinoma was the type of tumor least confused with the others due to the 
specific location inside the main bronchus that leads to specific spatial patterns in the CT image. The 
classification of normal ti ssue performed exceptionally well, with a recall score of 99%.  
After 50 epochs, there is a smooth convergence of the training graphs without any evidence of 
overfitting. From epoch 35 onwards, the validation loss was constant, and early stopping was 
appliedusing patience for 10 epochs.  
4.1.2 Sector 2 — Binary Malignancy Detection  
Pretraining of ImageNet V2 was utilized for the secondary binary classifier, whose architecture 
followed that of ResNet50, but had an extended head layer (2048 → 512 → 128 → 2) and employed 
Dropout layers of 0.4 and 0.3. The purpose of the secondary classifier was classification of 
benign/malignant nodules.The utilization of ImageNet V2 pre -trained weights proved successful for 
this problem statement. The advantage of transfer  learning amounted to around 7 percentage points 
(from 85.1% to 92.3%). This is because the rich texture and edges representations learned by pre -
trained feature extraction layers were successfully transferred to malignant tumors with their distinct 
border  and density variations.  
 
Compared to Benign (0.91), the binary classification method displays greater precision in terms of 
the Malignant category (0.94), as this classification method is preferred because it decreases the 
probability of false negatives, meaning the lack of identifying existing cancers. In terms of the ability 
of this model to differentiate between small textural differences of benign and malignant nodules, the 
presence of a larger classification head with an additional intermediate 128 -neuron layer becomes 
helpful.  
 
4.1.3 Model Architecture Comparison  
ResNet50 was clearly superior to the remaining classification models. Residual links allow this neural 
network to learn complicated features hierarchically due to the better management of the  vanishing 
gradient problem compared to deep but basic models such as VGG -16. EfficientNet -B0 showed 
mixed results when processing grayscale images.  
 
 
21 

=== PAGE 32 ===
  
 
 4.2 Image Preprocessing Evaluation  
 
To normalize the images generated by various types of CT scanni ng devices and methods, the pre -
processing pipeline is vital. The six steps in the pre -processing pipeline include Median Blur (k=3), 
Global Histogram Equalization, Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) with 
clipLimit = 2.0 and tileGridS ize = 8×8, Morphological Operations Open, Morphological Operations 
Close, and 3 -channel stacking with ImageNet Normalization.  
The entire pre -processing pipeline yields an increase of around 11.3% and 8.1% for Sector 1 and 
Sector 2, respectively, relative t o raw input images. The pre -processing step that has the most 
significant impact individually on image normalization is Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram 
Equalization (CLAHE). This algorithm improves the contrast between the nodule and the surrounding 
lung parenchyma. Morphological operations (open and close with a 3x3 elliptical kernel) help bridge 
small holes in tissue boundaries and reduce small artifacts.  
 
Fig.4.1 System Implementation Screenshot showing Subtype Identification  
and Malignancy Results.  
 
 
 
22 


=== PAGE 33 ===
  
 
The intentional pairing of the GHE and CLAHE approaches means that where the CLAHE approach 
boosts local contrast without amplifying the noise, which is inherent in CLAHE itself when applied 
directly to raw CT images, GHE provides basic contrast e nhancement to the whole image. As such, 
this approach results in CT scans with clear depiction of both the nodular structures and gross 
anatomical structures.  
4.3 Validation of Grad -CAM Explainability  
Through the recording of the gradients at the entrance of the last convolutional layer of ResNet50 
(Layer 4) in the backward propagation step for the target class, the Grad -CAM (Gradient -weighted  
Camera which is used by heat maps to identify the cancer wh ich are present and using colours shows  
(Class Activation Mapping) method generates visual heat maps. These regions of the CT scan most 
influential on the classification are marked by the resulting activation map . 
 
4.3.1 Localisation Accuracy  
In 98% of cases, the heatmap can correctly pinpoint the important area from the qualitative analysis 
of Grad -CAMs for 200 pathological test cases. For the overwhelming majority of test cases, the 
activation centroid (center weighted of the heatmap) falls within the specified nodule area. The 
remaining 2% of test cases that did not show satisfactory localization were because of very tiny 
nodules (less than 5 mm) at the edge of the lungs, due to the lack of localization capability because 
of the poor spatial resolution  of the 4th layer feature map (7×7).  
 
4.3.2 Anatomical Localization Using Eight Regions  
Without the center of the image, the 224x224 heatmap grid is subdivided into 3x3 grids using the 8 -
region analyzer, yielding 8 regions: Top Left, Top, Top Right, Left, Right, Bottom Left, Bottom, 
Bottom Right. 4.3.3 Heatmap Analysis MetricsThe heatmap analysis engine extracts six quantitative 
metrics from each Grad -CAM  
 
 
 
 
 
23 

=== PAGE 34 ===
  
 
This information correlates well with known clinical features for each specific subtype. 
Adenocarcinoma tends to appear as discrete peripheral nodules, as seen by the spherical shape and 
low activation rate. Normally developing in the mid bronchus, squamous cell carcinoma typically 
leads to rather large acti vations with an elongated shape. Being the most aggressive subtype, big cell 
carcinoma produces very large, intense activations that are numerous and irregular.  
 
Table 4. 2: Heatmap Analysis — Sample Results Across Cancer Subtypes  
 
4.3.4 Comparison of Dual -CAM  
Dual -CAM gives heatmaps of both the projected class and its strongest competitor, the class with the 
second highest probability. It is essentially visual representation of the decision boundary. The 
projected class heatmap is characterized by dense and intense activations within the nodule area, and 
in test cases the dual -CAM comparison reveals distinct activations in 94% of samples.  
 
4.4 LIME Analysis Evaluation  
Based on a perturbation approach, the LIME (Local Interpretable Model -agnostic Exp lanations) 
component provides additional information for the Grad -CAM approach. As opposed to examining 
the gradient flow, the LIME approach examines the effect of the prediction in relation to different 
regions covered by superpixels, whether it supports or negates the diagnosis  
 
 
 
24 Metric  Adenocarcinoma 
(avg)  Squamous 
Cell (avg)  Large Cell 
(avg)  
Activation 
Percentage  8.3%  14.7%  32.5%  
Size Label  Small  Medium  Large  
Mean 
Intensity  0.68 0.72 0.81 
Intensity 
Label  Moderate  Moderate  High  
Dominant 
Shape  Rounded nodular  Oval / 
elongated  Irregular  
Average 
Spots  1.2 1.6 3.4 

=== PAGE 35 ===
  
 
The best 8 superpixels and 100 perturbations were used for the LIME analysis. As compared to the 
Grad -CAM approach (<0.2s), the average GPU processing time is 8 seconds per image. 
Consequently, the LIME model was implemente d as an on -demand approach rather than an automatic 
one.The LIME results show strong agreement with Grad -CAM localisation (87 -89% location 
agreement), validating the consistency of the model's decision -making process across two 
fundamentally different expl anation methods. The positive superpixel coverage (12 -15%) indicates  
 
 
Fig.4.2 from a normal ct image to gead cam observed ct image  
 
that the model relies on specific, localised features rather than diffuse patterns, which is consistent 
with the focal nature of lung nodules.  
Explanation in natural language, including the percentage of supporting and dissenting superpixels, 
their location within the body part, and the implications on prediction performance, is generated via 
the narrative generated by the  LIME algorithm. In doing so, the story provides additional information 
that complements the Grad -CAM explanation through its completely different perspective on the 
issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
25 


=== PAGE 36 ===
  
4.5 Evaluation of Clinical Narrative Engines  
The Clinical Narrative Engine  generates structured clinical diagnosis based on the Grad -CAM 
heatmap visualization and classification output. The engine was clinically validated in terms of its 
relevance and correctness and offers 96 possible report versions (3 cancer types × 8 anatomi cal sites 
× 4 data types, plus 8 binary malignant sites).4.5.1 Report Structure Validation  
Four sections in each report are Location Analysis (tumor site description in terms of anatomy), 
Symptoms (eight symptoms depending on tumor  location), Next Steps (five procedures 
recommended for diagnostics), and Treatments (five possible treatment options). Established 
standards of radiology reporting and cancerology literature were compared with all clinical 
information provided.In order to  determine the stage of malignancy using the heatmap activation rate: 
less than 10% activation is indicative of Stage I; between 10% and 30% is Stage II; over 30% 
activation suggests Stage III -IV malignancy. The estimated result is valuable for a prelimina ry 
assessment for urgent surgical intervention.  
 
 
Fig.4. 3 Web Dashboard — Sector 2 (Malignancy Detection)  
 
 
 
26 


=== PAGE 37 ===
   
 
CHAPTER  5 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENT  
5.1 Conclusion  
To address the many limitations that exist in the existing CAD systems, it was possible to develop an 
effective and efficient Lung Cancer AI Diagnostic System. The hierarchical ResNet50 model with 
95% accuracy in 4 -class histological subtyping has the potential to match modern technologies, yet 
still produce a richer diagnostic infor mation.  
The clinicians not only will be able to understand what information has been detected by the AI, but 
also learn how and where it has done it with the help of the two -stage application of the XAI method 
(Grad -CAM and LIME). This process becomes even  more transparent with the help of the Dual -CAM 
system.  
The use of such innovations that bring about harmony between AI computations and clinical decision 
making includes the use of the Automated Clinical Narrative Engine that generates up to 96 diagnosis 
reports based on the location involved. Instead of delivering scores, the system offers meaningful 
results in terms of creating narratives out of heatmaps through symptomatology and other clinical 
interventions.Indeed, the whole web interface represents an  innovative way for integrating AI medical 
technologies into a convenient platform.  
 
5.2 Key Contributions  
1. Hierarchical ResNet50 Classification Pipeline: This two -tiered classification framework performs 
better than one -stage classification systems in c omplicated image recognition tasks, achieving 95% 
accuracy on four -class histopathology subtype classification and 92.3% on malignancy binary 
classification.  
2. Two -Level Explainability Approach: Offering complementary analysis with basically different 
methods of interpretation, this is the first use case of combining Grad -CAM interpretability approach 
and LIME interpretability method in a single diagnosis of lung cancer system.  
 3. Double CAM Visualization Component: This innovative approach creates heat m aps of the 
counter -class and predicted class simultaneously, making it possible for users to understand the 
decision -making process of the algorithm.  
4. 8-Area Zone Mapping: It is an automated spatial mapping tool that uses quantitative metrics for 
charact erizing size, shape, intensity, and spread of the regions of interest to map Grad -CAM 
activation zones to clinically meaningful anatomical zones.  
 
 
27 

=== PAGE 38 ===
  
 
Clinical Narrative Engine: An end -to-end report generation tool that features 96 variations based on 
locations to produce structured medical notes that include symptomatology, procedures, and 
treatment for the cancer subtype and precise location of the tum or. 
1. Production -Grade Deployment online: A complete online Flask application that comes with the AI 
medical chatbot, dark -theme interface, drag -and-drop upload of medical images, live inference and 
visualization, and summary report generation.  
 
5.3 Limit ations  
While the system demonstrates strong performance across multiple evaluation dimensions, several 
limitations must be acknowledged:  
 
1. Dataset used:  The dataset from one Kaggle Chest CT data set was utilized for training of the 4 -
class classifier. Performance may vary depending on the imaging technique used, the scanner brand 
or image reconstruction process used. Validation at multiple institutions is  required before clinical 
use. 
2. 2D slice analysis: In contrast to analyzing the entire 3D CT scan, the present methodology works 
with individual 2D CT scans. This means that the system cannot benefit from analysis in 3D of 
morphology, growth, and volumet ric estimation of nodules that physicians rely on in their 
assessments.  
3. Stage Prediction Estimation: The heat map -based prediction method does not replace the TNM 
staging process, which includes measurements of tumor size, lymph node metastasis, and met astasis, 
but only provides approximation estimates for the same.  
4. LIME Latency: While Grad -CAM runs at a sub -second latency range, LIME requires about 8 
seconds per interpretation. The latter is simply too long and therefore makes LIME unusable as a part  
of automatic operations.  
 5. Complex Question Handling by the Medical Chatbot: The current medical chatbot’s ability to deal 
with complex medical questions beyond the preset knowledge base is constrained since the chatbot 
does not employ a large language model but simply matches keywords.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

=== PAGE 39 ===
  
 
5.4 Future Enhancement  
Based on the outcomes and limitations of this project, several directions for future enhancement are 
identified:  
1. PACS/DICOM Compatibility : Clinical CT scans are maintained using PACS (Picture Archiving 
and Communication System) systems and are stored in DICOM (Digital Imaging and 
Communications in Medicine) file format. Future development will involve directly linking the 
system with hospital PACS systems so that radiologists are able to send CT scans to the AI diagnostic 
system from their existing radiology workstations. This will also allow for obtaining additional 
information about the DICOM scans (such as slice thickness and imaging protocol).  
2. 3D Volumetric Analysis : The system will enable the complete characterization of the nodules 
through volumetric analysis, growth rate calculation between successive scans, and analysis of the 
three -dimensional morphology through a switch from the present 2D slice -based analysis to 3D 
volumet ric analysis. This is accomplished by replacing the existing 2D ResNet50 model with the 3D 
CNN model that has been trained on volumetric CT scans, like 3D -ResNet or V -Net. The 3D Grad -
CAM will output a 3D heatmap instead of heatmaps for individual slices.  
3. Classification of Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) : There are currently three types of Non -Small 
Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) classified in the system. SCLC, representing about 15% of lung cancer 
cases, has a completely different treatment protocol (primarily chemo -radiation therapy versus 
surgical excision), and should also be classified within the clinical framework of the system.  
4. Incorporation of Large Language Model (LLM):  The diagnosis capabilities of the system during 
conversations can be significantly  enhanced through the incorporation of an advanced Large 
Language Model (LLM), specifically one that pertains to medical information (more developed 
versions of LLaMA or GPT), capable of participating in difficult medical dialogues, interpreting 
complex in formation in an easily understandable manner, and analyzing the information by 
comparing it to the current scientific literature on the topic of oncology. The information base for 
oncological knowledge will be incorporated into the RAG system.  
5. Multi -institutional Validation Study:  A multi -institutional validation study must be conducted 
before implementing the system in clinical settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 

=== PAGE 40 ===
                     REFERENCES  
 
[1]Mohammad Q. Shatnawi,Deep  learning -based approach to diagnose lung cancer using CT -scan 
images, elseveir.2025  
[2]TEHNAN I. A. MOHAMED, Enhancing Lung Cancer Classification and Prediction With Deep 
Learning and Multi -Omics Data, IEEE Access.2024  
[3]ABDULRAHMAN ALZAHRANI, Early Detection of Lung Cancer Using Predictive Modeling 
Incorporating CTGAN Features and Tree -Based Learning, IEEE Access 2022  
[4]Marmar R. Moussa, Inference of Tumor Progression Patterns in Colon Cancer Using Optimal Cell 
Order Analysis in Single Cell Resolution, IEEE TRANSACTIONS.2023  
[5]Hsieh -Fu Tsai, Evaluation of EGFR and RTK Signaling in the Electrotaxis of Lung 
Adenocarcinoma Cells under Direct -Current Electric Field Stimulation,PLOS one.2022  
[6]Explainable AI for Healthcar e 5.0: Opportunities and Challenges  
Deepti Saraswat ; Pronaya Bhattacharya , IEEE access 2022  
[7]Explainable A I in Healthcare  
Urja Pawar ; Donna O’Shea , IEEE Explore 2022  
[8]From Blackbox to Explainable AI in Healthca re: Existing Tools and Case 
StudiesParvathaneniNaga Srinivasu , 1N. Sandhya, august 2023  
[9]Explainable AI in Healthcare Application  
Siva Raja Sindiramutty (Taylor's University, Malaysia),  Wee Jing Tee  
2024  
[10]Deep Learning Innovations in Detection of Lung Cancer: Advances, Trends and Open 
Challenges, Cognitive Computation , 2025.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 

=== PAGE 41 ===
 APPENDIX A  
 
CODING  
LIME Explainer code  
""" 
================================================================  
LIME Explainer — Local Interpretable Model -agnostic Explanations  
Generates superpixel -based explanations for CT scan predictions  
================================================================  
""" 
 
import cv2  
import base64  
import numpy as np  
from PIL import Image  
from lime import lime_image  
from skimage.segmentation import mark_boundaries  
 
class LimeExplainer:  
    def __init__(self , model, transform, device, class_names):  
        self.model = model  
        self.transform = transform  
        self.device = device  
        self.class_names = class_names  
        self.explainer = lime_image.LimeImageExplainer()  
 
    def _batch_predict(sel f, images):  
        """ 
        LIME passes numpy arrays (N, H, W, 3) in 0 -255 range.  
        Convert to tensor and run inference.  
        """ 
        import torch  
 
        batch = []  
        for img in images:  
            pil = Image.fromarray(img.astype (np.uint8))  
            tensor = self.transform(pil)  
            batch.append(tensor)  
 
        batch_tensor = torch.stack(batch).to(self.device)  
 
        self.model.eval()  
        with torch.no_grad():  
            outputs = self.model(batch_tensor)  
            probs = torch.softmax(outputs, dim=1)  
                          31 

=== PAGE 42 ===
         return probs.cpu().numpy()  
 
    def explain(self, img_rgb_224, pred_idx,  
                num_samples=100, num_features=8):  
        """ 
        Generate LIME explanation for an image.  
        img_rgb_224: numpy array (224, 224, 3) uint8  
        pred_idx: predicted class index  
        Returns: (positive_overlay, mask_overlay, narrative)  
        """ 
        # Run LIME  
        try: 
            explanation = self.explainer.explain_instance(  
                img_rgb_224,  
                self._batch_predict,  
                top_labels=len(self.class_names),  
                hide_color=0,  
                num_samples=num_samples,  
                batch_size=10  
            ) 
        except Exception as e:  
            # Fallback if LIME fails  
            return None, None, f"LIME Error: {str(e)}"  
 
        # Get the explanation for the predicted class  
        temp_pos, mask_pos = explanation.get_image_and_mask(  
            pred_idx,  
            positive_only=True,  
            num_features=num_features,  
            hide_rest=False  
        ) 
 
        temp_full, mask_full = explanation.get_image_and_mask(  
            pred_idx,  
            positive_only=False,  
            num_features=num_features,  
            hide_rest=False  
        ) 
 
        # Create overlay images  
        pos_overlay = mark_boundaries(  
            temp_pos / 255.0, mask_pos,  
            color=(0.4, 1.0, 0.4), mode='thick'  
        ) 
         
 
 
                             32 

=== PAGE 43 ===
 GradCam Code  
""" 
================================================================  
Grad -CAM — Gradient -weighted Class Activation Mapping  
Works for both EfficientNet and ResNet architectures.  
================================== ==============================  
""" 
 
import cv2  
import numpy as np  
import torch  
import torch.nn.functional as F  
 
class GradCAM:  
    def __init__(self, model, model_type="efficientnet"):  
        self.model = model  
        self.model_type = model_type  
        self.gradients = None  
        self.activations = None  
        self._register_hooks()  
 
    def _register_hooks(self):  
        def forward_hook(module, input, output):  
            self.activations = output.detach()  
 
        def backward_hook(module, grad_input, grad_output):  
            self.gradients = grad_output[0].detach()  
 
        if self.model_type == "efficientnet":  
            target_layer = self.model.features[ -1] 
        elif self.model_type == "resnet":  
            target_layer = self.model .layer4  
        else: 
            target_layer = self.model.features.denseblock4  
 
        target_layer.register_forward_hook(forward_hook)  
        target_layer.register_full_backward_hook(backward_hook)  
 
    def generate(self, input_tensor, class_idx=None) : 
        self.model.eval()  
 
        # Move input to same device as model  
        input_tensor = input_tensor.to(  
            next(self.model.parameters()).device)  
        input_tensor = input_tensor.requires_grad_(True)  
 
 
              33 

=== PAGE 44 ===
  
        if class_idx is None:  
            class_idx = output.argmax(dim=1).item()  
 
        # Backward pass for target class  
        self.model.zero_grad()  
        target = output[0][class_idx]  
        target.backward()  
 
        # Compute Grad -CAM  
        gradients = self.gradients[0]  
        activations = self.activations[0]  
 
        # Global average pool gradients  
        weights = gradients.mean(dim=(1, 2))  
 
        # Weighted combination — keep on same device  
        cam = torch.zeros(  
            activations.shape [1:], 
            dtype=torch.float32  
        ).to(gradients.device)  
 
        for i, w in enumerate(weights):  
            cam += w * activations[i]  
 
        # ReLU and move to CPU  
        cam = F.relu(cam)  
        cam = cam.cpu().numpy()  
 
        if cam.max() > 0:  
            cam = cam / cam.max()  
 
        # Resize to 224x224  
        cam = cv2.resize(cam, (224, 224))  
        return cam, class_idx  
 
    def generate_dual_cam(self, input_tensor, pred_idx, num_classes):  
        """ 
        Generate Grad -CAM for both the predicted class and the  
        strongest counter -class (the next highest probability).  
        Returns: (pred_cam, counter_cam, counter_idx)  
        """ 
        # Forward pass to get probabilities  
        self.model.eval()  
        input_te nsor = input_tensor.to(  
            next(self.model.parameters()).device)  
 
                          34 

=== PAGE 45 ===
             logits = self.model(input_tensor)  
            probs = torch.softmax(logits, dim=1)[0]  
 
        # Find counter class — highest prob class that isn't pred  
        probs_np = probs.cpu().numpy()  
        sorted_idx = np.argsort(probs_np)[:: -1] 
        counter_idx = int(  
            sorted_idx[0] if sorted_idx[0] != pred_idx  
            else sorted_idx[1]  
        ) 
 
        # Generate CAM for pr edicted class  
        pred_cam, _ = self.generate(input_tensor.clone(), pred_idx)  
 
        # Generate CAM for counter class  
        counter_cam, _ = self.generate(  
            input_tensor.clone(), counter_idx)  
 
        return pred_cam, counter_cam, counte r_idx  
 
def generate_explanation_narrative(  
    prediction, confidence, cam_analysis,  
    class_names, probs_list, is_binary=True  
): 
    """ 
    Generate a natural -language AI explanation from  
    cam_analysis data and prediction results.  
    """ 
    a = cam_analysis  
    pred = prediction  
    conf = round(confidence, 1)  
 
    # Confidence quality  
    if confidence >= 90:  
        conf_q = "high confidence"  
        conf_note = "The model shows strong certainty"  
    elif confidence >= 70:  
        conf_q = "mod erate confidence"  
        conf_note = (  
            "The model shows reasonable certainty, "  
            "but clinical correlation is recommended"  
        ) 
 
 
 
35 

=== PAGE 46 ===
 APPENDIX B 
 
PUBLICATION DETAILS  
 
 
 
 
 
                          36 


=== PAGE 47 ===
  
APPENDIX C 
PLAGIARISM AI REPORT  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                 37 


=== PAGE 48 ===
  
APPENDIX D 
SIMILARITY  REPORT  
 
 
 
 
38 


